Sick Leave
SCOPE
1.1. This policy is applicable to all permanent and part-time employees of the bank.
2. ELIGIBILITY
2.1. When an employee is absent on account of illness for more than 2 consecutive working days the absence must be supported by a medical certificate. The Bank may also request a medical certificate if the employee has been absent on account of illness on more than two occasions during an eight-week period.
2.2. The Bank will accept a medical certificate issued as a result of a virtual consultation provided:
• The medical certificate has been signed by a practitioner who is registered with the HCPSA (i.e., Doctor, Dentist or Psychiatrist etc.).
• The certificate must state that the Doctor “had a virtual consultation”.
• Medical certificates from practitioners registered with AHCPSA will not be accepted as the council prohibits virtual consultations. (i.e., Homeopaths, Chiropractors, Naturopathy etc.).
2.3 Sick Leave rules only applicable to 6-day work week employees
2.3.1 Sick leave will be calculated according to 6 day working week principles for those staff employed on a 6-day work week and consequently a Friday may not be availed of as sick leave without also including the Saturday as leave or a unit off (where applicable). Units off can only be taken if sick leave is no more than 2 consecutive working days. If the employee is absent for more than 2 consecutive working days, sick leave must be availed of for the entire period and units off will not apply.
2.3.2 If the absence commences on a Thursday and a branch employee was due to report for duty on a Saturday, a medical certificate covering the Saturday absence must be produced and the employee will be credited with the hours of work for the Saturday. If the absence commences on a Thursday and the employee concerned is either a non-branch employee or a branch employee who has already been informed that he would be entitled to the next free Saturday, a medical certificate is not required if the employee resumes duty on the following Monday. In such cases the branch employee was not scheduled to work the Saturday and therefore should not be credited with the hours of work for this day.

3. SICK LEAVE ENTITLEMENTS
3.1 Under exceptional circumstances employees may qualify for special circumstances sick leave. Please refer to the special circumstances policy.
3.2 Sick leave will be calculated according to 6 day working week principles for those staff employed on a 6-day work week. Similarly, sick leave will be calculated according to 5 day working week principles for those staff employed on a 5-day work week.
3.3 If an employee becomes ill during their annual leave, sick leave will only become operative after the scheduled date of return; there would be no reinstatement of annual leave in such circumstances.
However, should an employee be hospitalized on account of illness or a non-scheduled procedure during annual leave, the Bank will credit the employee’s annual contractual leave entitlement with the same number of nights he/she stayed in hospital and debit their sick leave, accordingly, provided the employee has sick leave available to them.
The credit of annual leave days should not be set-off against the number of days availed of as the employee should merely be credited with the relevant days i.e., if 12 consecutive days on a 6-day work week have been applied for and two nights spent in hospital, annual leave records do not have to be adjusted to reflect only 10 days annual leave. The employee’s leave record should reflect 12 days with a credit of 2 days contractual leave. On a 5-day work week where an employee has applied for 10 consecutive days annual leave and two nights are spent in hospital, annual leave records do not have to be adjusted to reflect only 8 days annual leave. The employee’s leave record should reflect 10 days, with a credit of 2 days contractual leave.
Proof from the hospital and medical aid scheme of admission and discharge needs to be presented to the Bank for this benefit to be availed of.
3.4 The employee should advise the Bank as soon as possible of the hospital admission. Early notification to the ICB or PHI administrator of a potential claim should be considered where an employee will be absent from work for a period of longer than two weeks with the prognosis that he/she is unlikely to return to his/her normal duties for the foreseeable future i.e., longer than 3 months.
3.5 The onus lies with the line manager to load an employee’s sick leave where the absence has been longer than 2 weeks and the employee is unable to do so.
3.6 Where an employee has opted out of the PHI option, line managers should follow the referral process to Group Wellbeing. Normal sick leave rules and HC business processes apply for these employees. Sick leave entitlements over a 3-year period 6–Day Work Week 5-Day Work Week 4-Day Work Week 3-Day Work Week 2-Day Work week 48 40 32 24 16

3.7 Should an employee leave the workplace before 12h00 on any given day, due to ill-health, such absence will be treated as a full day’s sick leave.
3.8 Should an employee leave the workplace after 12h00 on any given day, due to ill-health, such absence will be treated as a half-day’s sick leave. Line management is required to actively manage such half-days.
3.9 In business units that work on a shift structure the following applies. Should an employee leave the workplace before 4 hours of work has been completed, due to ill-health, such absence will be treated as a full-day’s sick leave. Should an employee leave the workplace after having worked 4 hours or longer, such absence will be treated as a half-day’s sick leave. Line management is required to actively manage such half-days.
3.10 Where an employee needs to avail of sick leave which is maternity related, please refer to clause, 1.1.2 of the FirstRand maternity leave policy.
